---
title: Do Die
date: 2025-11-19 21:13 +0200
categories: [Thoughts, Society]
tags: [philosophy, longevity]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
robots: noindex

media_subpath: /assets/post_content/dodie/

pin: false
math: false

image:
  path: dodie.png
---
> Bryan Johnson is a tech entrepreneur who made his fortune from the sale of his payments company Braintree (which had acquired Venmo).
He is the founder of the "DON'T DIE" movement, advocating for radically extending human lifespan. Don't die implies that all people should try to live forever.
I admire him for his commitment and find longevity genuinely interesting. But I do not think his philosophy is good for the masses. I will formulate my believes and arguments at some point, but wanted to share this poem by chatty and me first.
{: .prompt-info}


<!-- In the halls where restless thinkers roam, -->
<!-- A voice cuts through the glittered chrome: -->
<!-- *To live forever is to freeze the stream—* -->
<!-- To chain the future to one dream. -->

Bryan pours his will to stay, <br>
Chasing immortality day by day; <br>
Yet in this quest to never fall, <br>
We may deny the rise of all. <br>

His call for all alive to try,<br>
May lift one life—yet stall the sky;<br>
What saves the self when all comply,<br>
Could seal the gate where futures lie.<br>

For every age must yield its throne, <br>
So younger minds can build their own; <br>
The soil of change is rich with death, <br>
Old roots must fade to grant new breath. <br>

As lifelong minds grow firm in place,<br>
Convictions harden, slowing pace;<br>
Ideas taught as living truth<br>
Can turn to walls against the youth.<br>

Progress walks on broken mold, <br>
On truths once fierce, now shy and old; <br>
Ideas age, their colors dim, <br>
While youth paints worlds beyond their rim. <br>

To clutch the years and never leave <br>
Is more to take than to receive; <br>
To steal tomorrow's unborn right, <br>
To dim its chance to seek its light. <br>

So let the species shape its way,<br>
Not fixed within one static day—<br>
For evolution’s truest cry:<br>
For all to live... all must die.
